![WASI logo](/WASI.png)

## Agenda for the October 22 video call of WASI Subgroup

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: October 22, 16:00-17:00 UTC
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: Dan Gohman
    - Email: hello@sunfishcode.online

**Note**: This meeting will be hosted by the subgroup co-chair Sam Clegg (@sbc100)

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Email Dan Gohman to sign up if it's
your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Please help add your name to the meeting notes.
    1. Please help take notes.
    1. Thanks!
1. Vote to move wasi-nn to stage 2; see [witx here](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-nn/blob/master/phases/ephemeral/witx/wasi_ephemeral_nn.witx).
1. Discuss about how to move forward with a [WASI Logo](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/issues/3). Proposals:
    1. We would never like to change the [current logo](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/raw/master/WASI.png).
    2. We would like to keep the [current logo](https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/raw/master/WASI.png) for now, and change it in the future when WASI is more mature.
       TODO: Ask the risks of changing the logo short-term and see if there is any way to address them.
       TODO: define what "mature" means (objectively) and how the process will be then
    3. We would like to start researching on a new logo now.
       TODO: define how the process will be
    4. Other ideas?

## Meeting Notes
