![WASI logo](/WASI.png)

## Agenda for the September 26 video call of WASI Subgroup

- **Where**: zoom.us
- **When**: September 26, 16:00-17:00 UTC
- **Location**: *link on calendar invite*
- **Contact**:
    - Name: Dan Gohman
    - Email: sunfish@mozilla.com

### Registration

None required if you've attended before. Email Dan Gohman to sign up if it's
your first time. The meeting is open to CG members only.

## Logistics

The meeting will be on a zoom.us video conference.
Installation is required, see the calendar invite.

## Agenda items

1. Opening, welcome and roll call
    1. Opening of the meeting
    1. Introduction of attendees
1. Find volunteers for note taking (acting chair to volunteer)
1. Adoption of the agenda
1. Proposals and discussions
    1. Initial WASI modularization draft
        - https://github.com/WebAssembly/WASI/pull/98

1. Closure

## Meeting Notes

Attendees:

Dan Gohman
Andrew Brown
Mark Bestavros
Leon Wang
Alex Crichton
Peter Huene
Luke Wagner
Yury Delendik
Pat Hickey
Artur Jamro

Meeting notes:

DG: WASI modularization draft PR is up, comments are welcome

Also, this makes the start of the point where we can start taking PRs for new API proposals, in the form of PRs which add and modify witx files.

Pat: Weâ€™re working on an HTTP API proposal.

Dan: There are also people working on Berkeley sockets APIs. Note that though there is a potential for overlap here, it makes sense to develop both.

Pat: In cases of overlap like this, the higher-level APIs may even by polyfillable on top of the lower-level APIs.
